[docs] Improve documentation of the system (#23294)
mui-org/material-ui: docs/src/pages/system/basics/basics.md

# Material-UI System

> <p class="description">Utility style functions for rapidly building custom design systems.</p>

Reviewer: ?
```suggestion
<p class="description">Utility CSS for rapidly building custom design systems.</p>
```

> <p class="description">Utility style functions for rapidly building custom design systems.</p>

Reviewer 2: Better

Material-UI comes with dozens or **ready-to-use** components in the core.
These components are an incredible starting point but when it comes to make your site stand out with a custom design, they can be challenging to customize. Introducing the system:

> The **system** lets you quickly build custom UI components leveraging the design tokens defined in your theme.

Reviewer: I don't understand the logic.

> The **system** lets you quickly build custom UI components leveraging the design tokens defined in your theme.

Reviewer 2: You wrote it. 😆

> The **system** lets you quickly build custom UI components leveraging the design tokens defined in your theme.

Reviewer: Maybe it should be?

> Material-UI has dozens of **ready-to-use** (already styled) components. These components are an incredible starting point but when it comes to making your site stand out with a custom design, it can be simpler to start from an unstyled version. Introducing the system:

# Material-UI System

> <p class="description">Utility-first style functions for rapidly building custom designs & systems.</p>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<p class="description">Utility-first style functions for rapidly building custom design systems.</p>
```

> The system lets you quickly build custom UI components leveraging the design tokens defined in your theme.

Reviewer 3: The very first page requires knowledge of "design token". Either we explain it here or link to pre-requisites to understand this page. Otherwise we'll have cliff in the very first sentence.

Author: ```suggestion
The system lets you quickly build custom UI components leveraging the design tokens defined in your theme. You can think of the `design tokens` as any theme values that can be used across different parts of your application.
```

Do you think this would be enough?

Reviewer 3: Why not just say "theme values" then?

> The system lets you quickly build custom UI components leverating the design tokens defined in your theme.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The system lets you quickly build custom UI components leveraging the design tokens defined in your theme.
```

## Demo

{{"demo": "pages/system/basics/Demo.js"}}

## Why

> There are several reasons for why you may need the system offered by Material-UI. Here are few of them:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are several reasons why you may need the system offered by Material-UI. Here are few of them:
```

### 1. Building consistent UIs is hard

> This is especially true, when there is at least more than one person building the application. There has to be some synchronization to what are the design tokens and how are those used. What parts of the theme structure should be used with what CSS properties etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is especially true when there is more than one person building the application. There has to be some synchronization as to what the design tokens are and how  they are used, what parts of the theme structure should be used with what CSS properties, etc.
```

### 2. Switching context between JS and CSS

> Often we find ourselves jumping from the JS to the CSS files, or from the components definition to the instance usage in order to conclude where and how some styles are defined. This is particularly true as the complexity (LOCs/# of elements) of the component we are working on increases. We could save a lot of time by removing this contraint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Often we find ourselves jumping from the JS to CSS, or from a component definition to an instance in order to understand where and how some styles are defined. This is particularly true as the complexity (LOCs/# of elements) of the component we are working on increases. We could save a lot of time by removing this constraint.
```

Reviewer 3: In addition to Matt's suggestion, let's reduce the jargon
```suggestion
Often we find ourselves jumping from the JS to the CSS files, or from the components definition to the instance usage in order to conclude where and how some styles are defined. This is particularly true as the complexity (lines of code/number of elements) of the component we are working on increases. We could save a lot of time by removing this contraint.
```

### 3. Less code to type

> Usually when defining styles for a react component we need to either define a separate stylesheet, use some kind of factory for creating the component (`styled()`), or use some kind of hook for generating the styles (for example `makeStyles()` & `useStyles()`), which not only means we need to switch the context from where we are currently in the code, but we need to also type much more code than the actual styles we want to have on some element.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Usually when defining styles for a React component we need to either define a separate stylesheet, use some kind of factory for creating the component (`styled()`), or use some kind of hook for generating the styles (for example `makeStyles()` & `useStyles()`), which not only means we need to switch context from where we are currently in the code, but we need to also type much more code than the actual styles we want to have on some element.
```

## How do we solve this?

> In order to solve these issues, we need to have a simple way of pulling & wiring the correct design tokens for specific CSS properties, and adding them directly on the react element where we want the styles to be applied, by a prop, that can be easily discoverable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to solve these issues, we need to have a simple way of pulling & wiring the correct design tokens for specific CSS properties, and adding them directly on the React element where we want the styles to be applied with a prop that is easily discoverable.
```

> The `sx` prop, as part of the system is the solution we see for solving these problems. In the example above, you may see how it can be used on the MUI components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `sx` prop, as part of the system, solves these problems. The example above shows how it can be used in MUI components.
```

> The property behaves as a superset of CSS that offers mapping values from the theme directly, by pulling specific values depending on the CSS property used. In addition to this, it allows a simple way of defining responsive values, that corresponds to the breakpoints values defined in the theme.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The prop provides a superset of CSS that maps values directly from the theme, depending on the CSS property used. In addition, it allows a simple way of defining responsive values that correspond to the breakpoints defined in the theme.
```

> With it you can build easily your custom visual components, like `Card`, `Badge`, `Chip` that could accept the props & behave exactlly as your design system specifies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With it you can easily build your custom visual components, like `Card`, `Badge`, `Chip` that could accept the props & behave exactly as your design system specifies.
```

> could accept the props

What props is this refering to?

Author: I meant the `Card` component that they build can have it's own props, different than our `Card` component. Maybe we should just say 

```suggestion
With it you can easily build your custom visual components, like `Card`, `Badge`, `Chip` that would behave exactly as your design system specifies.
```

> In the next sections, we will dive deeper into all features of the `sx` prop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following sections we will dive deeper into the features of the `sx` prop.
```

## Installation

```jsx
// with npm
npm install @material-ui/system

// with yarn
yarn add @material-ui/system
```

## The `sx` prop

> The `sx` prop is a superset of CSS, that let's you add any CSS to the underlaying component, while mapping values to different theme keys. This should help you to keep your application look consistent. The prop is available in all `@material-ui/core` components.

Reviewer 2: Duplicate of https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/23294/files#diff-9cfcff806f98bc7c0817a102aa630285ea875a8161eb89c2ad992e2659e62fa6R33

Author: Good call, fixed the section. Please take another look

> You can include this prop in your own components too by using the `experimentalStyled` utility from `@material-ui/core/styles` for creating your custom component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can include this prop in your own components too by using the `experimentalStyled` utility from `@material-ui/core/styles` for creating your custom components.
```

```jsx
import { experimentalStyled as styled } from '@material-ui/core/styles';

const Div = styled('div')``;
```

<b>Note:</b>

> You should use this prop whenever you need to add a style override to a Material-UI component. If you repeatedly add the same styles on a component, then `styled()` is better alternative, as it allows you to specify the overrides only once, and reuse them in all component instances.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should use this prop whenever you need to add a style override to a Material-UI component. If you repeatedly apply the same styles to a component, then `styled()` is better alternative, as it allows you to specify the overrides only once, and reuse them in all component instances.
```

### Design tokens in the theme

You can explore the [System properties](/system/properties/) page to discover how the different CSS (and custom) properties are mapped to the theme keys.

### Many shorthands

> We offer lots of shorthands on the CSS properties. Here are few examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are lots of shorthands on the CSS properties. Here are few examples:
```
Where are these documented?

```jsx
  <Box
    sx={{
      boxShadow: 1, // theme.shadows[1]
      color: 'primary.main', // theme.palette.primary.main
      m: 1, // margin: theme.spacing(1)
      p: {
        sx: 1, // [theme.breakpoints.up('sx')]: : { padding: theme.spacing(1) }
      },
      zIndex: 'tooltip', // theme.zIndex.tooltip
    }}
  >
```

### Superset of CSS

> As the property is a superset of CSS, you can use child or pseudo selectors, media queries, raw css values etc. On the example above, we had several examples of this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the property is a superset of CSS, you can use child or pseudo selectors, media queries, raw CSS values etc., as demonstrated in the examples above.
```

```jsx
  // Using pseudo selectors
  <Box
    sx={{
      // some styles
      ":hover": {
        '& .CardHeader': {
          bgcolor: `${props.color}.dark`,
        },
        '& .CardContent-header': {
          color: `${props.color}.dark`,
        },
        boxShadow: 6,
      },
    }}
  >
```

```jsx
  // Using media queries
  <Box
    sx={{
      // some styles
      "@media screen and (max-width: 992px)": {
        width: 300,
      },
    }}
  >
```

## Usage

It can be used from 3 different sources:

### Box

The `Box` component is a light component that gives you access to this functionality.

### Babel plugin

TODO: For #23220

### Core components

> All core Material-UI components will suppor the `sx` prop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All core Material-UI components will support the `sx` prop.
```

```jsx
import * as React from 'react';
import Box from '@material-ui/core/Box';
import { createMuiTheme, ThemeProvider } from '@material-ui/core/styles';

const theme = createMuiTheme({
  breakpoints: {
    values: {
      tablet: 640,
      laptop: 1024,
      desktop: 1280,
    },
  },
});

export default function CustomBreakpoints() {
  return (
    <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>
      <Box
        sx={{
          width: {
            tablet: 100,
            laptop: 300,
            desktop: 500,
          },
        }}
      >
        This box has a responsive width
      </Box>
    </ThemeProvider>
  );
}
```

If you are using TypeScript, you would also need to use [module augmentation](/guides/typescript/#customization-of-theme) for the theme to accept the above values.

```ts
declare module '@material-ui/core/styles/createBreakpoints' {
  interface BreakpointOverrides {
    xs: false; // removes the `xs` breakpoint
    sm: false;
    md: false;
    lg: false;
    xl: false;
    tablet: true; // adds the `tablet` breakpoint
    laptop: true;
    desktop: true;
  }
}
```

## Theme getter

> If you wish to use the theme for a CSS property that is not supported by the system, you can use a function as the value, in which you can access the theme object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you wish to use the theme for a CSS property that is not supported natively by the system, you can use a function as the value, in which you can access the theme object.
```

yarn add @material-ui/system
```

> ## Why utility?

Reviewer: The idea is to cover why developers should care.

> ## Why utility?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why use the system?
```

This is especially true when more than one person is building the application, as there has to be some coordination amongst members of the team regarding the choice of design tokens and how they are used, what parts of the theme structure should be used with what CSS properties, and so on.

The system provides direct access to the value in the theme. It makes it easier to design with constraints.

## The `sx` prop

The `sx` prop, as the main part of the system, solves these problems by providing a fast & simple way of applying the correct design tokens for specific CSS properties directly to a React element. The [demo above](#demo) shows how it can be used to create a one-off design.

This prop provides a superset of CSS that maps values directly from the theme, depending on the CSS property used. Also, it allows a simple way of defining responsive values that correspond to the breakpoints defined in the theme.

### When to use it?

- **styled-components**: the API is great to build components that need to support a wide variety of contexts. These components are used in many different parts of the application and support different combinations of props.

> - **`sx` prop**: the API is great to apply one-off styles. It's called "utility" for this reason.

Reviewer: What's the definition of a one-off style?

> - **`sx` prop**: the API is great to apply one-off styles. It's called "utility" for this reason.

Reviewer 2: Adding some margin?

> - **`sx` prop**: the API is great to apply one-off styles. It's called "utility" for this reason.

Reviewer: From my perspective, the whole http://material-ui.com/ page is a one-off style, it's never used anywhere else.

> - **`sx` prop**: the API is great to apply one-off styles. It's called "utility" for this reason.

Reviewer: But maybe it's pushing it too far. I guess there is a grey area. add some padding => sx for sure. build a button => styled for sure. In between 🤷‍♂️.

> - **`sx` prop**: the API is great to apply one-off styles. It's called "utility" for this reason.

Author: The examples are adding one of style on the Box component, there is not new component created that can be reused, but I agree that maybe the Box isn’t the best example for this, but for sure the simplest to illustrate the API

### Performance tradeoff

The system relies on CSS-in-JS. It works with both emotion and styled-components.

Pros:

- 📚 It allows a lot of flexibility in the API. The `sx` prop supports a superset of CSS. There is **no need to learn CSS twice**. You are set once you have learn the standardized CSS syntax, it's safe, it hasn't changed for a decade. Then, you can **optionally** learn the shorthands if you value the save of time they bring.

> - 📦 No need for purge. Only the used CSS on the page is included. The initial bundle size cost is **fixed**. It's not growing with the number of used CSS properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 📦 Auto-purge. Only the used CSS on the page is included. The initial bundle size cost is **fixed**. It's not growing with the number of used CSS properties.
```

> - 📦 No need for purge. Only the used CSS on the page is included. The initial bundle size cost is **fixed**. It's not growing with the number of used CSS properties.

Reviewer 2: > Only the used CSS on the page is included.

Included in what?

> - 📦 No need for purge. Only the used CSS on the page is included. The initial bundle size cost is **fixed**. It's not growing with the number of used CSS properties.

Author: In the application bundle is maybe more clear?

> - 📦 No need for purge. Only the used CSS on the page is included. The initial bundle size cost is **fixed**. It's not growing with the number of used CSS properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 📦 Auto-purge. Only the used CSS on the page is sent to the client. The initial bundle size cost is **fixed**. It's not growing with the number of used CSS properties.
```

  If you are already using the core components, it comes with no extra overhead.

Cons:

- The runtime performance take a hit.

  | Benchmark case                    | Code snippet         | Time normalized |
  | :-------------------------------- | :------------------- | --------------- |
  | a. Render 1,000 primitives        | `<div className="">` | 100ms           |
  | b. Render 1,000 components        | `<Div>`              | 110ms           |
  | c. Render 1,000 styled components | `<StyledDiv>`        | 160ms           |
  | d. Render 1,000 Box               | `<Box sx={}>`        | 270ms           |

  _Head to the [benchmark folder](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/tree/next/benchmark/browser) for a reproduction of these metrics._

  We believe that for most applications, it's **fast enough**. There are simple workarounds when performance becomes critical. For instance, when rendering a list with many items, you can use a CSS child selector to have a single "style injection" point (using d. for the wrapper and a. for each item).

## Usage

### Design tokens in the theme

> You can explore the [System properties](/system/properties/) page to discover how the different CSS (and custom) properties are mapped to the theme keys.

Author: Will address it in a follow up PR.

### Shorthands

There are lots of shorthands available for the CSS properties.
These are documented in the next pages, for instance, [the spacing](/system/spacing/).
Here are an example leveraging them:

```jsx
<Box
  sx={{
    boxShadow: 1, // theme.shadows[1]
    color: 'primary.main', // theme.palette.primary.main
    m: 1, // margin: theme.spacing(1)
    p: {
      sx: 1, // [theme.breakpoints.up('sx')]: : { padding: theme.spacing(1) }
    },
    zIndex: 'tooltip', // theme.zIndex.tooltip
  }}

> >

Reviewer 2: It might be simpler just to list some examples of CSS property shorthands. This is example is showing both CSS property and theme value accessors, which makes the sentence that follows confusing.

Reviewer: I think that both `mt` instead `marginTop` and `marginTop: 1` instead of `marginTop: (theme) => theme.spacing(1)` can be considered shorthands.

Reviewer 2: Yes, both properties, _and_ values. If you're going to skip this part, and use CSS, you might as well just skip the whole Style System section, and use inline styles.

Author: Sorry I don’t understand the point, should we list only the properties shorthands?

Reviewer: > Yes, both properties, and values. If you're going to skip this part, and use CSS, you might as well just skip the whole Style System section, and use inline styles.

I don't understand the logic in this conclusion.

```

These shorthands are **optional**, they are great to save time when writing styles but it can be overwhelming to learn new custom APIs.

> You might want to skip this part and bet on CSS, it has been standardized for decades, head to the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might want to skip this part and bet on CSS, it has been standardized for decades, head to the [next section](#superset-of-css).
```

> You might want to skip this part and bet on CSS, it has been standardized for decades, head to the next section.

Reviewer 2: But, you're already at that part - there's nothing left to skip 😄.  (BTW, is a section a collection of related pages, or part of a page - we seem to use it interchangeably, which can be confusing).

> You might want to skip this part and bet on CSS, it has been standardized for decades, head to the next section.

Reviewer: I don't understand. The superset is the next section, the current one is shorthand.

### Superset of CSS

> As the prop supports a superset of CSS, you can use child or pseudo-selectors, media queries, raw CSS values, etc. Here are a few examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the prop supports a superset of CSS, you can use CSS: child and pseudo-selectors, media queries, raw CSS values, etc. Here are a few examples:
```

> As the prop supports a superset of CSS, you can use child or pseudo-selectors, media queries, raw CSS values, etc. Here are a few examples:

Reviewer 2: None of those are a superset of CSS though...

> As the prop supports a superset of CSS, you can use child or pseudo-selectors, media queries, raw CSS values, etc. Here are a few examples:

Author: What I am trying to say is, apart from our system props you can use any regular CSS as well. Maybe we should just say
```suggestion
As part of the prop, you can use any regular CSS too: child or pseudo-selectors, media queries, raw CSS values, etc. Here are a few examples:
```

      desktop: 1280,
    },
  },
});

export default function CustomBreakpoints() {
  return (
    <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>
      <Box
        sx={{
          width: {
            tablet: 100,
            laptop: 300,
            desktop: 500,
          },
        }}
      >
        This box has a responsive width
      </Box>
    </ThemeProvider>
  );
}
```

If you are using TypeScript, you will also need to use [module augmentation](/guides/typescript/#customization-of-theme) for the theme to accept the above values.

```ts
declare module '@material-ui/core/styles/createBreakpoints' {
  interface BreakpointOverrides {
    xs: false; // removes the `xs` breakpoint
    sm: false;
    md: false;
    lg: false;
    xl: false;
    tablet: true; // adds the `tablet` breakpoint
    laptop: true;
    desktop: true;
  }
}
```

### Theme getter

If you wish to use the theme for a CSS property that is not supported natively by the system, you can use a function as the value, in which you can access the theme object.

{{"demo": "pages/system/basics/ValueAsFunction.js"}}

## Implementations

The `sx` prop can be used in four different locations:

### 1. Core components

> All core Material-UI components will support the `sx` prop.

Reviewer: So we don't need to update it in the future, once it's true?

```suggestion
All core Material-UI components support the `sx` prop.
```

### 2. Box

[`Box`](/components/box/) is a lightweight component that gives access to the `sx` prop, and can be used as a utility component, and as a wrapper for other components.
It renders a `<div>` element by default.

### 3. Custom components

In addition to Material-UI components, you can add the `sx` prop to your custom components too, by using the `experimentalStyled` utility from `@material-ui/core/styles`.

```jsx
import { experimentalStyled as styled } from '@material-ui/core/styles';

const Div = styled('div')``;
```

> **Note:**
>

> > You should use this prop whenever you need to add or override a component style. If you find you are repeatedly applying the same styles to a component, then `styled()` may be a better option, as it allows you to specify the styles only once, and reuse them in all component instances. See [Customizing components](/customization/components/) for all the alternatives.

Reviewer 2: (Note that that the _Customizing components_ section doesn't used `styled()`...

Reviewer: […] yet :)

Reviewer 2: Yep, just sayin' :)
